[Head note all pages: May 30, 1996, Prepublication Copy
Subject to Further Editorial Correction]



                         Appendixes



____________________________________________________________


                              A

              Contributors to the NRC Project 
               on National Cryptography Policy


                    A.1 COMMITTEE MEMBERS

Kenneth W. Dam, *Chair*, is the Max Pam Professor of American
and Foreign Law at the University of Chicago Law School. He is
also Of Counsel to the law firm of Kirkland & Ellis. Mr. Dam
received his bachelor's degree from the University of Kansas
and completed his graduate work at the University of Chicago
Law School. During the period from 1985 to 1992, he held the
post of corporate vice president for law and external
relations at IBM. Mr. Dam served as deputy secretary of state
(1982-1985), and as provost of the University of Chicago
(1980-1982). Mr. Dam currently serves on the board of Alcoa,
on the advisory board of BMW of North America, and on the
boards of a number of nonprofit institutions. He is also
co-chairman (with Senator Sam Nunn) of the Aspen Strategy
Group, a member of the international steering committee of the
Bilderberg Group, and chairman of the Advisory Board of the
Center for German and American Studies at Georgetown
University. He has also written books on the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade, the international monetary system, U.S.
economic policy, and the development of oil resources, as well
as many articles on economic policy and antitrust law.

W.Y. Smith, *Vice Chair*, is president emeritus and was
trustee of the Institute for Defense Analyses, and was past
president from 1984 to 1991. Prior to that he was a Fellow at
the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars at the
Smithsonian Institution, 1983 to 1984. His military posts
include deputy commander in chief of the European Command in
Germany, 1981 to 1983; chief of staff of SHAPE, Belgium, 1979
to 1981; assistant to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, 1975 to 1979; and director of Policy Plans and National
Security Affairs at the Office of the Assistant Secretary for
International Security Affairs. He has a BS from the U.S.
Military Academy, 1948, and an MPA and PhD from Harvard
University, 1961. He is a member of the executive committee of
the National Security Archives Board of Directors and has a
Distinguished Service Medal from the Air Force, among other
awards.

Lee Bollinger has been provost of Dartmouth College since July
1994. Prior to this, he was a professor at Michigan Law School
from 1979 and served as dean from 1987 to 1994; in 1983 he was
visiting associate at Clare Hall, Cambridge University. Mr.
Bollinger clerked for Supreme Court Chief Justice Warren E.
Burger in 1972 and 1973. Mr. Bollinger has a BS from the
University of Oregon, Phi Beta Kappa, 1968, and a JD from
Columbia Law School. His books include *Images of a Free
Press*, *The Tolerant Society: Freedom of Speech and Extremist
Speech in America*, and *Contract Law in Modern Society*. He
has published numerous articles on freedom of the press and
free speech, including articles on "The First Amendment and
National Security" and "The First Amendment and New
Communications Technologies." He was co-author of the NRC
publication "Constitutional Issues in Regulating Televised
Presentations of Violence" in 1982.

Ann Caracristi was appointed a member of President Clinton's
Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board in September 1993. She was
deputy director of the National Security Agency from January
1980 to August 1992, where she was responsible for agency
operations and for NSA policies on recruiting, training, and
assigning personnel. Ms. Caracristi holds a BA from Russell
Sage College and is a graduate of the Federal Executive
Institute. She has received the Department of Defense
Distinguished Civilian Service Award, the National
Intelligence Distinguished Service Medal, and the United
States National Security Award. Currently she is a consultant
to the NSA Scientific Advisory Board and a member of the Board
of Visitors of the Defense Language Institute Foreign Language
Center. She served as a member of the Chief of Naval
Operations Executive Panel from October 1982 to September
1991. She was a two-term president of the Association of
Former Intelligence Officers from 1989 to 1991. Most recently
she chaired a Director of Central Intelligence Task Force on
Intelligence Community Training.

Benjamin Civiletti has been in private law practice in
Baltimore and Washington, D.C., since 1981. Prior to that he
was U.S. attorney general from 1979 to 1981, deputy U.S.
attorney general from 1978 to 1979, and assistant attomey
general for the Criminal Division of the Department of
Justice, 1977 and 1978. He has an AB from Johns Hopkins
University, 1957, and an LLB from Columbia University and the
University of Maryland, 1961. He is chairman of the Board of
Directors of Maryland Healthcorp, a director of MNC Financial
Corporation and the Afro-American Publishing Company, a
trustee of Johns Hopkins University, chairman of Maryland
Legal Services Corporation, chairman of the Governors Task
Force for Funding of Public Education, and a member of the
board of directors of the Institute Against Violence and
Prejudice.

Colin Crook is chair of the Corporate Technology Committee for
Citicorp. As senior technology officer he has governance and
oversight responsibility for technology at Citicorp, including
operational management of the global information network. Mr.
Crook is a graduate of the United Kingdom's Liverpool
Polytechnic, where he earned his degrees (electrical
engineering) while working as a computer designer for the
Plessey Company. Mr. Crook held various positions in top
management for the Motorola Corporation in the United States
and Europe, as well as positions with Rank Precision
Industries, Zynar, Ltd., and British Telecom. He also was
senior vice president with Data General (USA). Mr. Crook has
been a key speaker at international industry conferences,
published in scholarly and professional journals, and been the
subject of numerous interviews. He is a member of the
Association for Computing Machinery, the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and the Institution of
Electrical Engineers (United Kingdom). In 1981, Mr. Crook was
elected to the United Kingdom's prestigious Royal Academy of
Engineering, the youngest person to be so honored.

Samuel H. Fuller is currently vice president, research and
architecture, at Digital Equipment Corporation. Prior to
joining Digital in 1978, Dr. Fuller was an associate professor
of computer science and electrical engineering at Carnegie
Mellon University (CMU). While at CMU he was involved in the
performance evaluation and design of several experimental
multiprocessor computer systems. His field of interest
includes computer science and electrical engineering. Dr.
Fuller received his BS from the University of Michigan (1968)
and his MS (1969) and PhD (1972) in electrical engineering and
computer science from Stanford University. He is a member of
the National Academy of Engineering, Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers, and Association for Computing
Machinery. Dr. Fuller has been a member of the Computer
Science and Telecommunications Board since 1986 and served on
the steering committee for the Competitiveness Colloquium
Follow-up Workshop on Systems Integration (1989-1991).

Leslie H. Gelb is president of the Council on Foreign
Relations. Previously, he was a featured columnist in the *New
York Times* (January 1991 to June 1993). He received his BA
degree (1959) from Tufts University and his MA and PhD degrees
(1961 and 1964, respectively) from Harvard University. Dr.
Gelb was executive assistant to U.S. Senator Jacob K. Javits
(1966 to 1967) and director for policy planning and arms
control, International Security Affairs, Department of Defense
(1967-1969), where he received the Distinguished Service
Award. In 1977, Dr. Gelb was appointed assistant secretary of
state, where he served as director of the Bureau of
Politico-Military Affairs. He was the national security
correspondent for the *New York Times* from 1981 to 1986, and
in 1985 was awarded a Pulitzer Prize in explanatory
journalism. Dr. Gelb is a trustee of Tufts University and the
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace; he is also a board
member of the Columbia University School of International and
Public Affairs, the Harvard University John F. Kennedy School
of Government, Joan Shorenstein Barone Center; and is a member
of the Council on Foreign Relations and the International
Institute for Strategic Studies. He has co-authored several
books on foreign policy and is a fellow of the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences.

Ronald Graham is director of information sciences at AT&T Bell
Laboratories, which he joined in 1988, and has also been a
professor at Rutgers University since 1987. Concurrently, he
has been the Regents' Professor of Mathematics at the
University of California, Los Angeles, and a visiting
professor in computer science at Stanford University and
Princeton University. He was the Fairchild Distinguished
Scholar at CIT in 1982. Dr. Graham's research is in
combinatorics, graph theory, algorithms, number theory, and
combinatorial geometry. He has a BS from the University of
Alaska, 1958, and an MA and PhD from the University of
California, Berkeley, 1962. Dr. Graham was awarded the Polya
Prize in combinatorics in 1972. He is a member of the National
Academy of Sciences and of the Mathematical Association of
America, and he is a fellow of the American Academy of Arts
and Sciences.

Martin Hellman has been a professor of electrical engineering
at Stanford University since 1971. Previously, he was an
assistant professor at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology from 1969 to 1971, and a staff member at the IBM
T.J. Watson Research Center from 1968 to 1969. Dr. Hellman's
specialties are information and communication theory,
cryptography and data security, and international security.
His BE is from New York University and his MS and PhD in
electrical engineering are from Stanford University. He is a
member of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics.

Ambassador Julius Katz is president of Hills & Company, an
international consulting firm that provides clients with
strategic advice and risk analysis on foreign trade and
investment. He was deputy U.S. trade representative from 1989
to 1993 and was the U.S chief negotiator for the North
American Free Trade Agreement. He also had senior management
responsibility for bilateral and regional negotiations with
Europe and the Western Hemisphere, as well as for the Uruguay
round of multilateral trade negotiations. Prior to that,
Ambassador Katz was chairman of the Government Research
Corporation in Washington (1987-1989) and worked in financial
services as chairman of Donaldson, Lufkin, & Jenrette Futures
Inc. He had a 30-year career at the Department of State, where
he held the position of assistant secretary of state for
economic and business affairs. While at the State Department,
he led numerous U.S. delegations in trade, commodity, and
transport negotiations.

Peter G. Neumann is principal scientist in the Computer
Science Laboratory at SRI, where he has worked since 1971. His
projects have involved computer systems security, high
assurance, human safety, and reliability. He was a member of
the Air Force Studies Board database security study and the
1989 to 1990 National Research Council's System Security Study
Committee that produced the report *Computers at Risk*. He
also served on an expert panel on civil and constitutional
rights for the U.S. House Judiciary Committee Subcommittee.
Dr. Neumann received his AB, SM, and PhD from Harvard
University in 1954, 1955, and 1961, respectively. In 1960 he
received a Dr. rerum naturarum from the Technische Hochschule,
Darmstadt, Germany, where he was a Fulbright scholar for 2
years. Since 1976 he has been editor of SIGSOFT Software
Engineering Notes for the Association for Computing Machinery
and is chairman of the ACM Committee on Computers and Public
Policy. Dr. Neumann was awarded an ACM Outstanding
Contribution Award in 1992 and the first SRI Exceptional
Performance Award for Leadership in Community Service, also in
1992. He is a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers and a member at large of the section
committee of the Section on Information, Computing, and
Communication for the American Association for the Advancement
of Science.

Raymond Ozzie is president of Iris Associates, a wholly owned
subsidiary of Lotus Development Corporation located
approximately 45 miles northwest of Boston in Westford,
Massachusetts. Iris Associates was founded by Mr. Ozzie in
1984 to develop a product now known as Lotus Notes.
Previously, Mr. Ozzie was employed by Lotus Development
Corporation and was the lead developer of Lotus' Symphony
product. Prior to his time at Lotus, he was employed by
Software Arts, the developer of the VisiCalc spreadsheet
product. At Software Arts, Mr. Ozzie managed the group
responsible for porting VisiCalc and another product,
TK!Solver, to various PC platforms, including the initial IBM
personal computer. Earlier, Mr. Ozie was employed by the
Commercial Systems Division of Data General Corporation, where
he was instrumental in the development of a distributed LAN
operating system. Mr. Ozzie received his degree in computer
science in 1978 from the University of Illinois in
Champaign-Urbana, where he did research in distributed
computing and was a systems programmer for PLATO, a pioneering
distributed computer-based education and collaboration system
connecting students and researchers at hundreds of locations
worldwide.

Edward Schmults has been senior vice president for external
relations and general counsel for GTE Corporation since 1984.
Previously he served as a deputy attorney general at the
Justice Department from 1981 to 1984, deputy counsel to the
President from 1975 to 1976, and undersecretary at the
Treasury Department from 1974 to 1975. He sits on the board of
directors of the Germany Fund and the Future Germany Fund and
is chairman of the board of trustees of the Refugee Policy
Group. He served with the U.S. Marine Corps from 1953 to 1955.
Mr. Schmults has a BS from Yale University and a JD from
Harvard University,1958.

Elliot M. Stone has been executive director of the
Massachusetts Health Data Consortium since it was established
in 1978 as a private, nonprofit corporation and a politically
neutral setting for the collection and analysis of the state's
large health care databases. The consortium publishes annual
reports to a broad constituency of health care organizations
and business coalitions. Previously, Mr. Stone served as
director of the state's Center for Health Statistics in the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health. Mr. Stone has been
an advisor to the Agency for Health Care Policy & Research,
the National Center for Healthcare Statistics, the Health Care
Financing Administration, and the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation. Mr. Stone is a board member of the Massachusetts
Peer Review Organization and chairman of its Data Committee.
He is an active member of the National Association of Health
Data Organizations and the Association for Health Services
Research. Mr. Stone received his bachelor's and master's
degrees at Boston University. He was a member of the Institute
of Medicine study *Health Data in the Information Age: Use,
Disclosure, and Privacy*.

Willis Ware is associate department head of the Computer
Sciences Department, the RAND Corporation. Dr. Ware was a
member of a U.S. delegation of scientists sent to the USSR to
discuss computers and related matters. He was the first
chairman of the American Federation of Information Processing
Societies and was appointed chairman of the Secretary's
Advisory Committee on Automated Personal Data Systems of the
Department of Health, Education and Welfare. Dr. Ware was
appointed to the Privacy Protection Study Commission and
served as both a member and vice-chairman. He was chosen as
co-recipient of DPMA's Computer Sciences Man of the Year and
is listed in *Who's Who in Engineering* and *American Men and
Women of Science* as well as other publications. His research
has been published in several journals. Dr. Ware received his
BS in electrical engineering from the University of
Pennsylvania, an SM in electrical engineering from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and a PhD in electrical
engineering from Princeton University. He was elected to the
National Academy of Engineering in 1985.



        A.2 ADDITIONAL CONTRIBUTORS TO THE PROJECT


   The following individuals provided the committee with
briefings, discussion, position papers, personal views, and
background materials. They are listed alphabetically.
Individuals who explicitly requested complete anonymity are
not listed.

Edward Allen, Federal Bureau of Investigation; Edward J.
Appel, National Security Council; John A. Armstrong, IBM
(retired); Wendell Bailey, National Cable Television
Association; Stewart Baker, Steptoe and Johnson; Richard C.
Barth, Motorola; Bill Bauriedel; David C. Bedard; Sheldon R.
Bentley, Boeing Computer Services; Jerry Berman, Center for
Democracy and Technology; Tom Berson, Anagram Laboratories;
Rose Biancinello, Department of State; Bob Blandford; Matt
Blaze; Eric Blossom; William Earl Boebert, Sandia National
Laboratories; Barry Briggs, Lotus Development Corporation;
David Brin; Ken Bronstein, Hewlett-Packard; Clinton Brooks,
National Security Agency; Melinda Brown, Lotus Development
Corporation; Robert E. Bruccoleri, Bristol-Myers Squibb
Pharmaceutical Research Institute; James Carr, U.S. District
Court of Toledo; Vinton G. Cerf, MCI Telecommunications
Corporation; Jesse Choper, University of California, Berkeley;
Anthony Clark, House Science Committee; Judi Clark; Floyd I.
Clarke, MacAndrews & Forbes; David Cohen, Central Intelligence
Agency; Leroy L. Cook, MITRE Corporation; Daniel Corcoran,
Electronic Data Systems; Aaron W. Cross, IBM; William Crowell,
National Security Agency; Walter Curtis, National
Semiconductor Corporation; David Decker, GTE Laboratories;
Philippe Dejean, Service Central de la Securite des Systemes
d'Information, Service du Premier Ministre (France); James X.
Dempsey, Center for National Security Studies; Dorothy
Denning, Georgetown University;

Whitfield Diffie, Sun Microsystems; M. Nanette DiTosto, U.S.
Council for International Business; Esther Dyson, EDventure
Holdings Inc.; Robert I. Eachus; Carl Ellison, CyberCash Inc.;
Glenn Everhart; Lincoln D. Faurer, National Security Agency
(retired); C. William Ferguson, Semaphore Corporation; Robert
Fielding, National Security Agency; Hal Finney; Clifford S.
Fishman, Catholic University of America; William Flanagan,
Lotus Development Corporation; Martin L. Fogelman; Greg
Frazier, House Intelligence Committee; Paul Freedenberg, Baker
and Botts; Louis Freeh, Federal Bureau of Investigation; Roger
E. French, Digital Equipment Corporation; A. Michael Froomkin,
University of Miami Law School; Robert Gallagher, Department
of Commerce; Richard Garwin, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center;
Toby Gati, Department of State; Jeffrey Gaynor, Department of
Defense; Kenneth Geide, Federal Bureau of Investigation;
Thomas A. Gilbert, Network Systems Corporation; Louis Giles,
National Security Agency; John Gilmore, Cygnus Support; Ronald
Goldstock, Kroll Associates; Jamie S. Gorelick, Department of
Justice; Rebecca Gould, Business Software Alliance; Graham
Greenleaf, University of New South Wales; William F. Hagerty,
IV, Management Advisory Group; Keith Hall, Department of
Defense; Bruce Hamilton; Martha Harris, Department of State;
Matthew D. Healy, Yale Center for Medical Informatics; Bruce
Heiman, Business Software Alliance; David A. Hendon,
Department of Trade and Industry (United Kingdom); David
Henry, National Security Agency; Richard Hertling, Senate
Judiciary Committee; Mack Hicks, Bank of America;

Richard Hill; Lance Hoffman, George Washington University; K.
Mignon Hoffman, Boeing Computer Services; Robert Hood,
Congressman Newt Gingrich's Office; Eric Hughes; Deborah
Hurley, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development;
Rick Jinelsky, Hewlett-Packard; Michael Paul Johnson; Thomas
Kalil, National Economic Council; Raymond Kammer, National
Institute of Standards and Technology; Phil Karn; Sally
Katzen, Office of Management and Budget; Elizabeth Kaufman,
Citibank; Stephen T. Kent, BBN Communications; Gordon Kettler,
General Motors; Raymond Khan, General Motors; Joseph Kielman,
Federal Bureau of Investigation; Steve Killion, Federal Bureau
of Investigation; Julie Krueger, Atrnel Corporation; Susan
Landau, University of Massachusetts, Amherst; P.E. (Pat)
Lanthier, Pacific Bell; Tony Lauck; Joshua Lederberg,
Rockefeller University; Ronald Lee, National Security Agency;
James Leinweber, University of Wisconsin, Madison; Blaise
Liffick, Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility;
Steven B. Lipner, MITRE Corporation; Myles Losch; Robert
Lucky, Bell Communications Research; Deborah Malarnud,
University of Michigan Law School; Noel Matchett, Information
Security Inc.; Tim May; Bruce McConnell, Office of Management
and Budget; Kirk McConnell, Senate Armed Services Cornrnittee;
Kate McGee, Oracle Corporation; F. Lynn McNulty, McNulty and
Associates;

Catherine Medich, CommerceNet; Ken Mendelson, House Judiciary
Committee; Douglas Miller, Software Publishers Association;
John Millis, House Select Committee on Intelligence; William
Mockler, Drug Enforcement Administration; Vera A. Murray, IBM;
Michael Nelson, Office of Science and Technology Policy;
Robert Nieves, Drug Enforcement Administration; Edward
O'Malley, OSO Group; Christopher Padilla, AT&T Governrnent
Affairs; Donn Parker, SRI International, Inc.; Kurnar Patel,
University of California, Los Angeles; Bill Patterson; Nick
Patterson, Renaissance Technologies; Craig Paul, University of
Kansas; Paul J.J. Payack, Network Systems Corporation; Mona
Peglow, Novell; David Pensak, DuPont Corporation; Henry H.
Perritt, Jr., Villanova University; John Pescatore, IDC
Government; John Pignataro, New York City Police Department;
John Podesta, The White House; Carl Pomerance, University of
Georgia; William Poulos, Electronic Data Systems; William
Press, Harvard College; Robert Prestel, National Security
Agency (retired); Todd Quinto, Tufts University; Alfred
Reifman, Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress;
Robert Rich, National Security Agency (retired); Ed Roback,
National Institute of Standards and Technology; Bruce Roberts,
Unisys; Cesare Rosati, Department of State;

Sholom Rosen, Citibank; Howard Rosenblum, National Security
Agency (retired); Marc Rotenberg, Electronic Privacy
Information Center; Lee D. Rothstein, VeriTech; Ira
Rubenstein, Microsoft Corporation; Clint Sare; John Scheibel,
House Foreign Affairs Committee; Roger Schell, Novell; Jeff
Schiller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; James
Schindler, Hewlett-Packard; Kurt Schneckenburger; William
Richard Scruggs, Department of Justice; Raymond R. Semko,
Department of Energy; William S. Sessions, Sessions &
Sessions, L.C.; Edward Sheehan, Electronic Data Systems; Alan
Shipman, Enterprise Integration Technology, CommerceNet;
Gursharan Sidhu, Apple Computer; Cheryl Simmons, Computer and
Communications Industry Association; Lori S. Sinton, National
Semiconductor Corporation; Landgrave T. Smith, Jr., Institute
for Defense Analyses; Peter Smith, Member of Parliament,
United Kingdom; Teresa Smith, Central Intelligence Agency;
Oliver Smoot, Information Technology Industry Council; Carl
Snyder, Hewlett-Packard; George Spix, Microsoft Corporation;
Edward Springer, Office of Management and Budget; Ross
Stapleton-Gray, TeleDiplomacy Inc.;

Shari Steele, Electronic Frontier Foundation; John D.
Steinbruner, Brookings Institution; Barry Steinhardt, American
Civil Liberties Union; Ivan Sutherland, Sun Microsystems
Laboratories; Raymond Tate, National Security Agency
(retired); Duane Thompson; George B. Trubow, John Marshall Law
School; Roger Ulbrich, Chevron Corporation; Paul Walker, House
Armed Services Committee; Stephen Walker, Trusted Information
Systems Inc.; Lester Waters, Microsoft Corporation; Daniel
Weitzner, Center for Democracy and Technology; William
Whitehurst, IBM; Daniel Whiteman, General Motors; Randy
Whiting, Hewlett-Packard; Philip Wilcox, Department of State;
Janice Williams, Central Intelligence Agency; Charity Wilson,
Senate Judiciary Committee; Joan D. Winston, Office of
Technology Assessment; R. James Woolsey, Shey & Gardner.

____________________________________________________________

[End Appendix A]





