BIOS/PC STARTUP INFORMATION

Please see disclaimer at http://yoyo.cc.monash.edu/~davmac/

When powered on Intel CPUs begin execution at the end of their address space.
(eg absolute address 0FFFF0h for 808x, 0FFFFF0h for 286 systems, even more
F's for 32-bit systems).  This address is executed in real mode, even if the  
address is not normally addressable in real mode - to achieve this, the ROM   
BIOS is mirrored at the end of memory as well as in the normal real mode 
address.  In general this address will contain a far JMP instruction to the
actual startup code.  Various registers at this stage still hold information
about the CPU (eg model and 'stepping' information). This 'end of address'
must be duplicated at absolute address 0FFFF0h so that it is addressable in
real mode (the CPU powers up in real mode).

Memory is not automatically cleared when the CPU is reset.  It is possible to
signify using CMOS and memory locations that the CPU reset is not meant as a
system reset, but (for example) simply as a return to real mode from
protected mode.  Note that it is not necessary to reset the CPU to exit
protected mode on 386+ systems.

The ROM BIOS, on a system startup, executes the POST (power-on self-test)
routine which usually checks memory, establishes devices etc.  The POST
routine also fills in the BIOS memory area at physical address 00000400h and
sets up the real mode interrupt handlers (those connected to IRQ lines are
set to dummy handlers which simply acknowledge the interrupt with the PIC and
return, those assigned to BIOS services are set to the appropriate address,
which may vary with the BIOS manufacturer and revision).  The POST then
checks for extensions ROMs at this point (for example the video card).
Absolute addresses C0000h through E0000h are searched in 2KB increments for
the signature 55h 0AAh.  If the signature is found, the next byte is a length
indicator for the ROM (in 512 byte blocks) and the next bytes contain a FAR
CALLable address (it should be called as an empirical address, with the
lowest possible offset value.  For example, absolute address C0003h is called
as C000:0003h).  The extension BIOSes perform initialization and then return.
On entry, SS:SP must be set up as a valid stack.

Lastly, the POST routine searches the disk drives (usually the first floppy,
followed by the hard drive) for a bootable disk.  In determining whether a
disk is bootable, the first sector of the first track (or cylinder in the
case of hard drives) and first head is examined for the signature (byte 55h
followed by byte 0AAh) at the end of the sector (offset 1FEh).

For floppy drives, the first sector of the first track of the first head is
loaded and executed.  For hard drives, the first sector of the first cylinder
of the first head is loaded and executed.  The 'boot sector' as it is known
is loaded at 0000:7C00h and executed, though the CS:IP values seem to vary;
Both 0000:7C00 and 07C0:0000 seem valid - code to be used on multiple
machines must either be relocatable or include a far jump instruction to fix
the address. On entry, the stack (though of unknown location) will be valid,
and the DL register containing the boot drive as known to BIOS - 0 for the
first floppy, 80h for the first hard drive.
